Add flip for changing import statement semantics (#277)
onflow/flips: cadence/20240612-import-contract-as-reference.md

        
        // Modifying fields within the contract is allowed.
        Foo.array[0] = 3
        Foo.array.append(42)
        Foo.array.remove(at: 0)
    }
}            
```
### Drawbacks

This is a breaking change. Certain users may have to update their code.

### Alternatives Considered

A non-breaking alternative solution is to keep current language semantics as-is, and warn about contract fields that
has `access(all)` access-modifier, through a tooling like the linter.
However, this doesn't guarantee the foot-gun would be fixed.

### Performance Implications

None

### Dependencies

None

### Engineering Impact

This change is trivial in the implementation.

A draft implementation can be found at: https://github.com/onflow/cadence/pull/3417

### Compatibility

This is a breaking change.

### User Impact

This would impact the Cadence 1.0 staged contracts. I ran an analyzer for the updated core contracts and the
staged-contracts, and as of 12th June 2024, only three (3) contracts out of 456 are impacted by this change.
The changes needed for those contracts are fairly simple, and would only require changing a couple of lines of code.

## Related Issues

> None

Reviewer: This is obviously beyond the scope of this current FLIP (and would be a new feature that can be added after Cadence 1.0), but I think that changing imports to create an unentitled reference to the contract value does suggest that it may be useful to also be able to import an entitled reference to the contract as well. There would need to be some kind of way to guarantee that only certain people can do this, and syntax for it as well.

Reviewer 2: I think easiest solution is to disallow entitlements on contract functions.

Reviewer 3: I double checked this, and entitled contract members are already forbidden: https://github.com/onflow/cadence/blob/a1199d656c222a1253fdb362c20bd05f7c310287/runtime/tests/checker/entitlements_test.go#L1673-L1686

For example, mutating the `Foo.array` would result in an error.

```cadence
import Foo from 0x1

access(all) fun main() {
    var array: &[Int] = Foo.array  // Accessing field would also return a reference.

    // All of the below operation would be statically rejected,
    // since `Foo.array` would be an unauithorized reference.
    Foo.array[0] = 3
    Foo.array.append(42)
    Foo.array.remove(at: 0)
}
```

One thing to note is that, this proposal would **not** change the way the contract value is accessed within the contract itself.

```cadence
contract Foo {
    access(all) array: [Int]

    init() {
        self.array = []
    }
    
    access(all) fun bar() {
        // Accessing the contract within itself would return the concrete value, not a reference.
        
        var foo: Foo = Foo  // Type the contract value is `Foo` (not `&Foo)`
        
        var array: [Int] = Foo.array  // Accessing field would also return a copy of the concrete value.
        
        // Modifying fields within the contract is allowed.
        Foo.array[0] = 3
        Foo.array.append(42)
        Foo.array.remove(at: 0)
    }
}            
```
### Drawbacks

> This is a breaking change. Certain users may have to update their code.

Reviewer 4: So code that would need to be changed here is if you directly use a imported contracts fields and mutate them right?

Author: yes, but in addition, if you use a field of a imported inside a function (say for example return as is), then the type annotation would change.
e.g:

```cadence
fun myFunction(): T {
    return ImportedContract.foo
}
```

then this would change to
```cadence
fun myFunction(): &T {  // <-- reference type
    return ImportedContract.foo
}
```
(This is also the change needed for those three contracts that breaks)

### Alternatives Considered

> A non-breaking alternative solution is to keep current language semantics as-is, and warn about contract fields that

Reviewer 4: Personally I think this is very dangerous. Cadence-1.0 is already breaking so this is just one more thing that we need to do.

Author: Agree!

sponsor: Supun Setunga (supun.setunga@flowfoundation.org)
updated: 2024-06-11
---

# FLIP 134: Import contracts as references

## Objective

Change the import statement semantics to import a reference to the contract, instead of importing the concrete value.
Thus, accessing the fields of a contract externally would return references to fields, preventing any unintended external mutations.

## Motivation

A huge thanks goes to Deniz Mert Edincik (@bluesign) for pointing out the below security foot-gun in the existing design.

In the [external mutability FLIP](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89), the behaviour for accessing fields of a
composite value was changed, to prevent external-mutation foot gun.
You can read more about the overall vision [here](https://github.com/onflow/flips/blob/main/cadence/vision/mutability-restrictions.md).
The essence of the change is that, if someone owns the composite value, they would have the full access (read/write/mutate) to its fields.
Otherwise, if someone only got a reference to the composite value, then they can access the fields also as references,
and the entitlements would kick-in to limit what they can do with those fields.

> Unfortunately, one edge-case we didn't realize at the time is that, contracts only have one value per network (it's a shared state),
> and by importing a contract, one could get the full access to that contract value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, one edge-case that was not considered during the evaluation of the [external mutability improvements FLIP](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89) is that contracts are singletons, and importing a contract provides owned access to that contract value.
```

The imported contract value behaves like a reference, but is not represented using a reference in the language semantics. 

> Because of that, if the contract had an array/dictionary/composite -typed field defined as read-only (i.e: `access(all)`),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because of that, if the contract has a container-typed field (e.g., array, dictionary, composite)  defined with public access (i.e., `access(all)`),
```

then anyone could modify the content of that field, such as inserting/removing elements, etc.

```cadence
access(all) contract Foo {
    access(all) var array : [Int] // Can't set a new value to the array, but can "update" the content (insert/remove/etc) 
}
```

Here, the author of the contract may have intended it to be "read-only", however, it is not truly read only.

```cadence
import Foo from 0x1

access(all) fun main() {
    Foo.array[0] = 3
    Foo.array.append(42)
    Foo.array.remove(at: 0)
}
```

> This is exactly the type of foot-gun we tried to prevent using the external mutability improvements ([FLIP 89](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is exactly the type foot-gun that was intended to get prevented by the changes proposed in the [external mutability improvements FLIP](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89).
```

But unfortunately, given the contract import results in a non-reference value, the suggested changes in that FLIP

> does not get apply here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
do not apply here.
```

## User Benefit

> Prevent the foot-gun of unintended external mutations to read-only contracts fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prevent the foot-gun of unintended external mutations to read-only contract fields.
```
